# What is dynamic programming?
Dynamic programming is a method of solving a problem by dividing it into several identical subtasks which are recursively related to each other. The simplest example would be the Fibonacci numbers - to compute some number in this sequence, we first have to compute a third number by adding up the first two, then a fourth in the same way based on the second and third, and so on ( yeah, we heard about the closed formula).

# How to use this?
The solution to the problem by dynamic programming must contain the following:
- The dependence of the dynamic elements on each other. This dependency can be explicitly given in the condition (this is often the case if it is a numerical sequence problem). Otherwise you can try to find out some known numerical series (like Fibonacci numbers) by calculating first few values manually. If you're not lucky at all - you'll have to think ?
- The value of the initial states. As a result of the long division into subtasks, you have to reduce the function either to already known values (as in the Fibonacci case - the first two terms are predefined), or to a problem that can be solved elementarily.

# Do you need to write a recursive method to solve it?
Of course not, there are other approaches to implementing the dynamics. Let's consider them on the example of the following problem:

Calculate the n-th term of the sequence given by the formulas:

$$ a_{2n} = a_{n} + a_{n - 1}, $$

$$ a_{2n + 1} = a_{n} - a_{n - 1}, $$

$$ a_{0} = a_{1} = 1. $$

## Solution idea
Here we are given both initial states (a0 = a1 = 1) and dependencies. The only difficulty that may arise is understanding that 2n is a condition for an even number, and 2n+1 is an odd number. In other words, we have to check whether the number is even, and count it according to different formulas.

## Recursive solution
The obvious implementation is to write the following method:
```cpp
private static int f(int n){
    if (n == 0 || n == 1) 
        return 1;

    if (n % 2 == 0)
    {
        return f(n/2)+f(n/2-1);
    } else {
        return f((n-1)/2)-f((n-1)/2-1);
    }
}
```
And it works fine, but there are nuances. If we want to compute ``f(12)``, the method will compute the sum of ``f(6)+f(5)``. At the same time, ``f(6)=f(3)+f(2)`` and ``f(5)=f(2)-f(1)``, i.e. the value of ``f(2)`` we will compute twice. The salvation from this is memoization (caching of values).

## Recursive solution with value caching
The idea behind memoizing is very simple - once we calculate a value, we store it in some data structure. Before every calculation, we check if the value to be calculated is in that structure, and if it is, we use it. We can use an array filled with flag values as the data structure. If an element's value by index ``N`` is equal to a flag value, it means we haven't calculated it yet. This creates some difficulties, because the flag value must not belong to the set of function values, which is not always obvious. Personally, I prefer to use a hash table - all actions in it are performed for ``O(1)``, which is very convenient. However, with a large number of values two numbers may have the same hash, which naturally causes problems. In such a case, it is worth using a red-black tree, for example.

For the already written function ``f(int)`` the caching of values would look as follows:
```cpp
private static HashMap<Integer, Integer> cache = new HashMap<Integer, Integer>();

private static int fcashe(int n){
    if(!cache.containsKey(n)){
      cache.put(n, f(n));
    }
    return cache.get(n);
}
```
Not too complicated, is it? But it gets rid of a huge number of operations. The price you pay for it is extra memory usage.

# Sequential computation
Now, let's get back to where we started: recursion is slow. Not too slow for it to be a real trouble in real life, but in sports programming every millisecond counts.

The method of sequential evaluation is suitable only if the function refers only to the items before it - this is its main, but not the only disadvantage. Our task satisfies this condition.

The essence of the method is the following: we create an array of ``N`` elements and sequentially fill it with values. You may have already guessed that in this way we can calculate values that are not needed for the answer. In a large part of dynamics problems, this fact can be omitted, since all values are often needed for the answer. For example, when searching for the shortest path, we cannot avoid calculating the path to a certain point, we need to consider all variants. But in our problem we need to calculate approximately ``log2(N)`` values (more in practice), for ``922337203685477580th element (MaxLong/10)`` we need ``172`` calculations.


Another disadvantage of this approach is the relatively high memory consumption.

# Creating an index stack

What we have to do now is essentially write our own recursion. The idea is that we first go "down" from ``N`` to the initial states, remembering the arguments from which we need to compute the function. Then we go "back up", successively calculating values from those arguments, in the order we have written down.

Dependencies are calculated as follows:

```cpp
LinkedList<Integer> stack = new LinkedList<Integer>();
stack.add(n);

{
    LinkedList<Integer> queue = new LinkedList<Integer>();

    queue.add(n);
    int dum;
    while(queue.size() > 0){
        dum = queue.removeFirst();

        if(dum % 2 == 0){
            if(dum / 2 > 1){
                stack.addLast(dum / 2);
                queue.add(dum / 2);
            }
        if(dum / 2 - 1 > 1){
            stack.addLast(dum / 2 - 1);
            queue.add(dum / 2 - 1);
        }

        } else {
            if((dum - 1) / 2 > 1){
                stack.addLast((dum - 1) / 2);
                queue.add((dum - 1) / 2);
            }
            if((dum - 1) / 2 - 1 > 1){
                stack.addLast((dum - 1) / 2 - 1);
                queue.add((dum - 1) / 2 - 1);
            }
        }

    }
}
```

The resulting stack size is how many calculations we need to do. This is how I got the number ``172`` mentioned above.

Now we extract the indexes one by one and calculate values for them using formulas - it is guaranteed that all necessary values will already be calculated. We will store them as before - in a hash table.

```cpp
HashMap<Integer,Integer> values = new HashMap<Integer,Integer>();

values.put(0,1);
values.put(1,1);

while(stack.size() > 0) {
    int num = stack.removeLast();
    
    if(!values.containsKey(num)) {
        if(num % 2 == 0) {
            int value = values.get(num / 2) + values.get(num / 2 - 1);
            values.add(num, value);
        } else {
            int value = values.get((num - 1) / 2) - values.get((num - 1) / 2 - 1);
            values.add(num, value);
        }
    }
```

All the necessary values have been calculated, all that remains is to write

```cpp
return values.get(n);
```

Of course, such a solution is much more time-consuming, but it's worth it.

# What about problems where not everything is given?

To make it clearer, consider the following one-dimensional dynamics problem:

```
At the top of a staircase containing N steps, there is a ball that starts bouncing down them to the base. 
The ball can jump to the next step, a step after one or after 2. 
(That is, if the ball is on step 8, it can move to step 5, 6 or 7.) 
Determine the number of all possible "routes" of the ball from the top to the ground.
```

## Solution idea
There is only one way to get to the first step: by making a jump with length equal to one. The second step can be reached by a jump of length 2, or from the first step - 2 ways in total. The third step can be reached with a jump of length three, from the first or the second step. That is, a total of 4 options ``(0 -> 3; 0 -> 1 -> 3; 0 -> 2 -> 3; 0 -> 1 -> 2 -> 3).`` Now consider the fourth step. It can be accessed from the first step - one route for each route up to it, from the second or third step in a similar way. In other words, the number of routes to the 4th step is the sum of routes to the 1st, 2nd and 3rd steps. Mathematically speaking, ``F(N) = F(N - 1) + F(N - 2) + F(N - 3).`` The first three steps will be considered initial states.

## Implementation via recursion
```cpp
private static int f(int n){
  if(n==1) 
      return 1;
  if(n==2) 
      return 2;
  if(n==3) 
      return 4;

  return f(n - 1) + f(n - 2) + f(n - 3);
}
```
There is nothing tricky here.

## Implementation with an array of values
Given that a simple solution on an array of N elements is obvious, I will demonstrate here a solution on an array of only three.

```cpp
int[] vars = new int[3];
vars[0] = 1; 
vars[1] = 2;
vars[2] = 4;

for(int i = 3; i < N; i++){
    vars[i%3] = vars[0]+vars[1]+vars[2];
}

System.out.println(vars[(N - 1) % 3]);
```

Since each successive value depends only on the previous three, no value under the index less than ``i-3`` would be of any use to us. In the above code, we write the new value in place of the oldest value, which is no longer needed. The circularity of the remainder of division by 3 helps us avoid a bunch of conditional operators. Simple, compact, elegant.

# Two-dimensional dynamics
There are no special features associated with two-dimensional dynamics, but I'll take a look at one problem here, just in case.


```
In an NxM rectangular table a player is at the beginning in the top left cell. 
In one move he is allowed to move to the adjacent cell either to the right, 
or down (he is not allowed to move left or up).
Count how many ways a player has to get to the bottom right square.
```

## The solution idea

The logic of the solution is identical to that in the problem about the ball and the ladder - only now in a cell ``(x, y)`` can get from the cells ``(x - 1, y)`` or ``(x, y - 1). ## So, in total ``F(x, y) = F(x - 1, y)+F(x, y - 1).## Additionally, we can understand that all cells of type ``(1, y)`` and ``(x, 1)`` have only one route, either straight down or straight to the right.

## Implementation via recursion

For goodness sake, you don't need to do two-dimensional dynamics via recursion. It has already been mentioned that recursion is less beneficial than a loop in terms of performance, so two-dimensional recursion also reads horribly. It is only in such a simple example that it looks easy and harmless.

```cpp
private static int f(int i, int j) {
    if(i == 1 || j == 1) 
        return 1;

    return f(i - 1, j) + f(i, j - 1);
}
```

## Implemented via an array of values

```cpp
int[][] dp = new int[Imax][Jmax];

for(int i = 0; i < Imax; i++) {
  for(int j=0; j < Jmax; j++) {
    if(i == 0 || j == 0) {
      dp[i][j] = 1;
    } else {
      dp[i][j] = dp[i - 1][j]+dp[i][j - 1];
    }
  }
}

System.out.println(dp[Imax - 1][Jmax - 1]);
```

A classic dynamic solution, nothing unusual - check if a cell is an edge and set its value based on neighbouring cells.